piliko
======

Piliko is a very, very, very rough implementation of some formulas from 
Rational Trigonmetry in a computer language. 

Current status
==============

This code is 'alpha' level. It is highly experimental. It can do basic 
calculations, but the whole type system has not been thought out very 
carefully and many functions are partially or wholly unimplemented. 
Tests have not been created.

Disclaimer 
==========

Rational Trigonometry was discovered and developed by Norman J 
Wildberger. He is not affiliated with this package and the use of his 
terms here, like Rational Trigonometry, quadrance, spread, etc, doesn't 
imply that he endorses this package.

* https://www.youtube.com/user/njwildberger
* http://web.maths.unsw.edu.au/~norman/
* http://www.wildegg.com
* http://www.cut-the-knot.org/pythagoras/RationalTrig/CutTheKnot.shtml
* http://farside.ph.utexas.edu/euclid.html

The statements here are probably accurate, but of course I am not an 
expert so there you have it.

But I don't know the computer language Python
=============================================

You don't need to know Python to do basic calculations. The syntax is
designed to be somewhat simple. Please see the examples. As long as you can
start up a python interpreter on your machine, you should be OK. See
http://www.python.org to download a python interpreter for your computer. 
Once you can get to the screen where you type 
	
	print 'hello world'

and get a 'hello world' to appear, then you will almost be ready to use 
piliko. The next step is to put the 'piliko.py' file in a folder where 
your python interpreter can find it. Then you can load piliko with this 
command in python:

	from piliko import *

Examples
========

Example A:

	from piliko import *

	p1 = point(0,0)
	p2 = point(3,0)
	p3 = point(0,4)
	print p1,p2,p3

	L1 = line( p1, p2 )
	L2 = line( p1, p3 )
	s = spread( L1, L2 )
	print s

Result:

	[0,0] [3,0] [0,4]
	1

Example B:

	from piliko import *

	v1 = vector(3,0)
	v2 = vector(0,4)
	print v1, v2

	q1 = quadrance( v1 )
	q2 = quadrance( v2 )
	print q1, q2

	s = spread( v1, v2 )
	print s

Result:

	(3,0) (0,4)
	9 16
	1

Example C:

	p1,p2,p3,p4 = point(0,0),point(3,0),point(2,0),point(6,0)
	print is_harmonic_range( p1, p2, p3, p4 )

Result:

	True

Example D:

	p=point(3,4)
	bq,rq,gq=blue_quadrance(p),red_quadrance(p),green_quadrance(p)
	print p,' ',bq,rq,gq,' ',sqr(bq),sqr(rq),sqr(gq)

Result:

	[3,4]   25 -7 24   625 49 576

More examples can be found in the files named example01.py, example02.py, etc
To run them:

	python example01.py

Basic principle
===============

The Rational numbers, unlike finite floating point numbers, are closed 
under addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. This makes 
them uniquely suited to geometry, as many geometry packages have proven 
(including CGAL and LEDA). Why? Because many of the basic geometry 
operations, including scale, translate, boolean, intersection, etc, are 
doable in algebra using only plus, minus, multiply, and divide.

Therefore no approximation is required to perform these basic 
operations, which means the issue of floating-point error disappears.

In fact it is possible to develop a geometry that does not use 
transcendental functions at all. There are rational analogues for 
rotation. Any conic curve can be approximated very well by rational 
parameterization (rational points on the curve). Bezier curves can be 
approximated by rational points. And thus, truetype(TM) fonts. Also a large 
number of polynomial curves can be parameterized by rational points. 
There are even people working algorithms to create rational 
paramterizations automatically. 

There are also rational parameterizations for many of our favorite 3 
dimensional objects, like spheres, toruses, hyperbolic sheets, 
non-circle based toruses, and there are even people who have worked out 
rational parameterizations of 3 dimensional 'knot' shapes.

The term 'approximate' here means that the curves that are usually 
approximated with floating point approximations of transcendental 
functions, are instead approximated by drawing line segments between 
rational coordinates. For example drawing lines between the rational 
points of the unit circle will result in a polygon approximation of the 
circle. Comparing this to the approximation of the circle generated by 
floating point functions like cosine and sine, it can be argued
that the floating point circle approximations are also polygons, 
because when you have to finally output the circle to some format, like 
a pixellated screen, or an STL or DXF file, you are going to output 
distinct points that represent points on the circle, and those points
are probably going to be either ASCII decimal points, which is simply a series of
powers of ten (3.125 = 3/10^0 + 1/10^1 + 2/10^2 + 5/10^1000) or some binary
format, which is just a series of powers of two (11010.1010 = 2^4+2^3+2^1+2^-1+2^-3)

In the end, there is no 'exact' circle in a computer, so you are just 
choosing between methods of approximation. Rational approximation is 
just another approximation method. However it has some advantages in 
that, as described, it is closed under division, so you can scale 
objects without loss of information, inside of your 'engine', before you 
actually have to output them. And rational points on a circle form 
pythagorean triples, so they have an exact distance from the center, not 
an approximate distance. Like the point 3,4 is exactly 5 from the 
center.

It may be even possible to create anlogues of geometry algorithms (like 
catmull clark subdivision or Delaunay triangulation) using rational 
points and rational functions.

The downside is that you lose some old things, like the notion of 
distance in any situation (for example, the point 1,1 is sqrt(2) from 
the origin... a rational circle will not include any such point at 45 
degrees angle), or the intersection of any line with any circle (this is 
replaced by the notion of the intersection of a line with the polygon 
approximation of the circle). Even the length of the side of a 45-45-90 
or 30-60-90 triangle is lost.

Another huge loss is that you can't add two angles together with simple 
addition. You have to use 'spread polynomials' instead. Err.. hrm.

The other downside is it's possible a bit slow. Computers were optimized 
for floating point for 50 years. Hardware doesnt generally deal with 
rationals. You also have to worry about overflowing your integers. 
Typically rational number software uses 'big int', which can expand the 
integer past the size native to the machine. For example on a 32-bit 
computer 'big int' allows the use of integers larger than the maximum 
expressable in 32 bits, which is around ~4 billion. This makes it slow 
though.

Lastly, any algorithm that re-uses a lot of numbers can generate 
massively long integers, basically 'overflow' of the ordinary 64-bit 
integer, creating lots of RAM usage and very very slow arithmetic 
operations. For example, simulating a space ship with 
force=g*mass1*mass2/radius^2 can create huge integers very quickly.

Copyright License
=================

This code is free for use under a basic BSD-style Open Source Software 
license as described in the LICENSE file. You can freely copy and use it
per the terms in that LICENSE file.
